---
title: "Failing repeatedly"
categories:
  - Career
tags:
  - Fail
  - Startup
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
---

## What we (don't) say about failure

Before quarantine I went to an event in San Francisco that explored failure. Panelists spoke of the volumes they’d written on the topic, and we learned strategies to reflect on past failures and avoid future failures. The event was uplifting because it made failure into something instructive and avoidable. What a high! A few moments after it ended I realized that it was totally inconsistent with my experience, or at least it was an incomplete picture. 

We had analyzed failures of the closed variety.  A plane crash, a layoff, a demotion, even a literal face plant.  These singular events are clear misses that noone wants to repeat. I understand that we want to study them and learn to recognize early warning signs in an effort to avoid repeating them.  I’m going to call these singular, clear-cut events Type 1 failures.  

I want to talk about Type 2 failures - the kind of everyday failures that we may not want to avoid.  A recent viral video comes to mind in which a small girl is trying to scale a wall.  She fails a hundred times, and her dad is patiently recording her as she sprints full speed at a wall and leaps and crashes.  She gets a little better over time and ultimately, she scales the wall.  It must have been months.  She must have gone to bed so many nights covered in bruises, dreaming about that wall.  I think about that video every time I crash along my startup journey.  So, roughly one to three times a day.  She and her dad created a physical representation of my inner world, and to them I am grateful. 

Type 2 failures are subtle and harder to parse. When do you give up?  When do you keep going?  I don't know the answer, but I think that you have to find ways to enjoy the crashes.  Sometimes you’re on a slowly sinking ship, and sometimes you’re unknowingly improving. Some of us are never going to scale that wall. When do we cut our losses? And when we do, what happens next?

You might question whether Type 2 failures really exist. “She’s getting better every day, so she's not failing,” you might say.  Well, to you I reply, "She’s literally crashing into the ground.  Of course she’s failing."  And she doesn’t stop.  She just keeps doing it.  She isn’t following the steps of my workshop, in which we recognize failure so as to not repeat it.  She is intentionally repeating it with grit and blind hope that she can achieve what is currently impossible. 

<!-- I think it's important to recognize the difference between Type 1 and Type 2 failures.  -->
Sometimes the answer is just to keep failing, knowingly, again and again, and not let it get you down. Powering through seems particularly hard these days, as we have become obsessed with reflection. We want to meditate on what has happened.  We want to grow and never repeat the mistake.  And wow do we want to talk about it.  We want to process it and process how we processed it.  All this effort towards self-improvement can prevent us from finding the best option - just keep going. It's not, "Don’t be afraid of failure, because from failure you can learn and grow,” but “Don’t be afraid of failure because failure is just… fine.  As is. Just keep doing it.  Stop trying to reflect every time you fail.”  

It would have taken that girl so much longer to scale that wall if she had reevaluated all her 6 years of life after every time she fell off that wall.

<!-- ## How we talk about failure -->

<!-- Reflecting on Type 1 failures is easy and pervasive. “We were careening towards a cliff,” they say, “leadership couldn’t see it or couldn’t change course.”  “We crashed and we didn’t learn,” or “we did learn, but at what cost?”  These are interesting events and experiences to explore and learn from.   -->

<!-- 
Type 2 failures are the everday kind. But what about Type 2 failures?  What about the everyday kind of failing?  The failure that’s just part of the fabric of our experience.  I don’t know that it's the same thing.  -->



## Find out if you're failing

In the early days of building my startup I felt like I was losing all the time, and sometimes that was a real drag.  Could I stop?  Quit losing every day?  Could I get a safe job that challenged me and provided solid mentorship and dental coverage?  Of course! Should I?

I needed a way to know when to let go. When I started, I set a somewhat arbitrary timeline of six months to build a prototype and secure some funding. I didn’t know what I didn’t know, and six months had seemed kind of long but not so long that I’d need to start eating ramen and saving change for BART.

My original startup idea, the one for which I left my full time job, was interesting but it just wasn’t good enough, in ways both obvious and subtle. I sought feedback, felt the failures, adjusted my plan, rinse, repeat. By the time I reached the 6 month mark I felt like I was at capacity for Type 2 fails. Feedback from continuous user interviews and my early pitches had highlighted some GTM challenges, and that was beyond the simple math trouble that comes when you’re trying to address underserved communities with novel hardware. Keeping prices down was in conflict with high costs to build the thing.  User and investor input had brought up many more paths to serve these communities.  

<!-- 
I want to be clear about actively seeking the knocks. It’s hard. Most people just don’t want to tell you that all or parts of your idea sucks.  You have to push them, and it would be easy and foolish not to.   -->
<!-- 
Any given investor has seen hundreds of companies live and die. They have expertise that I just don’t have.  So I have 30 minutes to pull out of them what I don’t know that I don’t know.  I want them to knock me down, and I want it to be out of left field.  Initially these relative strangers give bad feedback.  It’s vague and incomplete and sometimes demonstrably off-base.   -->



I sent up a few emergency flares.  I reached out to the network I’ve spent the last six months cultivating.  These are people I look up to, some I’ve known and worked with for years, and others I barely know.  To my genuine surprise, every single one of them replied.  Over two days, I shared coffee, a phone call, a lunch and happy hour drinks. In our conversations they were open and critical, discerning and sharp.  They challenged me and my assumptions and my ideas, and I realized I could keep honing in on the best solution for the problem I had chosen. 

<!-- 
These weren’t just supporters, they were experts.  They’ve seen this before.  They’re founders of companies further along than mine, they’re investors and VPs at bigger companies.  And each of them gave me their undivided attention for 30 minutes to an hour.  Because I asked.  In our conversations they were open and critical, discerning and sharp.  They challenged me and my assumptions and my ideas.  They focused my thinking, zoomed out and zoomed in. -->

The products I was exploring near the end bore little functional similarity to the products I started with. Everyday I lost a little ground, and every week or so I gained more somewhere else. I was learning by failing rather than learning to avoid it.

## When to quit (or at least when I did) 

In the end I decided to close my startup, not because I had been worn down by the incessant failures, but because of the path they revealed. In my case, I slowly learned that the barrier I was trying to address didn't primarily need a technical solution, it needed societal and insurance solutions. I knew myself well enough to know that I wouldn't remain passionate enough in those spaces to sustain the onslaught of Type 2 failures.

My lesson about quitting is this -- when doing something hard, I need to be passionate about both the problem I'm trying so solve, *and about the type of solutions that I will create.* The best solution to a problem you care about might not be something that you want to build.

<!-- 
Once you choose a problem to dedicate a company or career to solving, lots of wisdom says that you should be flexible in the solutions, so that you can go where the problem leads.  It is absolutely true that the best solution may be far from where you start, but we also need to acknowledge that not every person is suited to build every type of solution. 

The "best" solution shifts with feedback and deeper understanding. If it shifts too far from your interests, it may be time to go. If you can remain invested in both the problem and the path, you can persevere and maybe even enjoy the litany of Type 2 failures headed your way.  -->




## If you're failing right now 

Type 2 failure feels bad, and relentless, and you sometimes don't always know whether you are progressing or realizing Einstein's definition of insanity. It is a kind of learning that not everyone has the stomach for, and it's easy to avoid. (There are lots of other valid ways to learn!)

If you're going through it and thinking about giving up, my suggestion is to take a long break to fully mentally reset. After that, try to determine whether you still feel passionate about both the problem and the path. If not, can you shift them so that you do? 

Also, read [Mindset](https://bookshop.org/p/books/mindset-the-new-psychology-of-success-carol-s-dweck/7841782?ean=9780345472328&next=t) by Carol Dweck. 